[DOCS-9921] Add attacker clustering & attacker fingerprint public doc (#27194)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/security/application_security/threats/attacker-clustering.md

---
title: Attacker Clustering

> aliases:
>   - /security/application_security/threats/attacker_clustering
> disable_toc: false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disable_toc: false
```

further_reading:
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/attacker_fingerprint"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Attacker Fingerprint"
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/threat-intelligence/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Threat Intelligence"
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/event_rules"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "In-App WAF Rules"
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/security_signals/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Security Signals"
---

> This topic describes how to use **Attacker Clustering** to block more efficiently distributed attacks.
> 
> ## Overview
> 
> Datadog Application Security Management (ASM) analyses traffic of security signals to find attacker patterns and help you mitigate distributed attacks more efficiently. Attacker clustering highlights a set of common attributes that is shared by a significant portion of the traffic and suggests blocking on those.
> 
> Blocking on attacker attributes means you keep your application or API protected even as the attacker rotates between IPs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Overview

Attacker Clustering improves distributed attack blocking. Datadog Application Security Management (ASM) identifies security signal traffic attacker patterns and to help you mitigate distributed attacks more efficiently.

Attacker clustering highlights a set of common attributes shared by a significant portion of traffic and suggests blocking based on those attributes.

Blocking on attacker attributes means you keep your application or API protected even as the attacker rotates between IPs.
```

> ## For which signals are attacker clusters computed?
> 
> The attacker clustering is computed for every [ASM security signal][4] being emitted from a detection rule tagged with the following:
> `category:account_takeover` or `category:fraud`
> 
> Out of the box, the attacker clustering will be computed for the ASM detection rules that detect API abuse, credential stuffing or brute force attacks.
> 
> If you create custom detection rules and want the attacker clustering to be executed, do not forget to add such tags in the detection rule editor (see screenshot below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What signals are used for attacker clusters?

The attacker clustering is computed for every [ASM security signal][4] emitted from a detection rule tagged with `category:account_takeover` or `category:fraud`

Out of the box, attacker clustering is computed for the ASM detection rules that detect API abuse, credential stuffing, or brute force attacks.

If you want the attacker clustering executed on custom detection rules, add these tags in the detection rule editor (see screenshot below).
```

{{< img src="security/application_security/threats/tag-on-detection-rule.png" alt="Screenshot of the Detection rule editor showing where to add tags"  >}}

> ## Attacker Clustering Attributes
> 
> Attacker clustering is computed on the following request attributes of requests:
> * Browser name
> * Browser version
> * OS name
> * OS version
> * User agent header
> * [Datadog attacker fingerprinting][2]
> 
> When the attacker attributes are identified, we show them on the signal side panel and signal full page. Attacker attributes can be a combination of the attributes listed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Attacker clustering attributes

Attacker clustering is computed using the following request attributes:
* Browser name
* Browser version
* OS name
* OS version
* User agent header
* [Datadog attacker fingerprinting][2]

When the attacker attributes are identified, they are displayed on the signal side panel and **Signals** page. Attacker attributes can be a combination of the attributes listed above.
```

{{< img src="security/application_security/threats/attacker-attributes.png" alt="Screenshot of an ASM signals with attacker attributes identified"  >}}

> ## Attacker Clustering Mechanism
> 
> The clustering algorithm analyzes frequency of attributes in the traffic of the attack. It selects attributes that appear frequently while also filtering out the noise from your usual traffic. The goal being to suggest an attribute that can be blocked on to stop or slow the attacker down.
> 
> The algorithm  tracks the changes in the attack traffic by identifying emerging trends as the attacker changes tactics (ie. change of headers, tool). The attacker cluster gets updated accordingly to the latest traffic trends.
> 
> Traffic associated with threat intelligence also weights into the clustering mechanism. The more an attribute is correlated with [Threat Intelligence][1] the higher the chance to create an attacker cluster around this attribute.
> 
> The attacker clustering attributes selected are then shown as regular expressions that can be used to block with ASM's [In-App WAF][3] or to filter out traffic in ASM trace explorer for investigation.
> 
> ## Further Reading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Attacker clustering mechanism

The clustering algorithm analyzes the frequency of attributes in the attack traffic. It selects attributes that appear frequently while also filtering out typical traffic noise. This process results in attributes that can be blocked to stop or slow the attacker.

The algorithm tracks the changes in the attack traffic by identifying emerging trends as the attacker changes tactics (for example, changing headers, tool, etc.). The attacker cluster is updated with the latest traffic trends.

Traffic associated with threat intelligence is also considered in the clustering mechanism. The more an attribute is correlated with [Threat Intelligence][1], the higher the chance to create an attacker cluster around this attribute.

The attacker clustering attributes selected are then shown as regular expressions that can be used to block with ASM's [In-App WAF][3] or to filter out traffic in ASM Traces explorer for investigation.

## Further reading
```

---
title: Attacker Clustering
aliases:
  - /security/application_security/threats/attacker_clustering
disable_toc: false
further_reading:
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/attacker_fingerprint"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Attacker Fingerprint"
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/threat-intelligence/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Threat Intelligence"
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/event_rules"
  tag: "Documentation"

>   text: "In-app WAF Rules"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  text: "In-App WAF Rules"
```

- link: "/security/application_security/threats/security_signals/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Security Signals"
---

This topic describes how to use **Attacker Clustering** to block more efficiently distributed attacks.

## Overview

Datadog Application Security Management (ASM) analyses traffic of security signals to find attacker patterns and help you mitigate distributed attacks more efficiently. Attacker clustering highlights a set of common attributes that is shared by a significant portion of the traffic and suggests blocking on those.

> Blocking on attacker attributes means you keep your application or api protected even as the attacker rotates between IPs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Blocking on attacker attributes means you keep your application or API protected even as the attacker rotates between IPs.
```

> ## For which attacks are attacker clusters computed?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## For which signals are attacker clusters computed?
```

Subjective but: Attacks is less precise imho. Saying we compute these for specific signals seems more clear to me.

The attacker clustering is computed for every [ASM security signal][4] being emitted from a detection rule tagged with the following:
`category:account_takeover` or `category:fraud`

Out of the box, the attacker clustering will be computed for the ASM detection rules that detect API abuse, credential stuffing or brute force attacks.

If you create custom detection rules and want the attacker clustering to be executed, do not forget to add such tags in the detection rule editor (see screenshot below).

{{< img src="security/application_security/threats/tag-on-detection-rule.png" alt="Screenshot of the Detection rule editor showing where to add tags"  >}}

## Attacker Clustering Attributes

Attacker clustering is computed on the following request attributes of requests:
* Browser name & version
* OS name & version

> * ASN number

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we put ASN and TI in a separated part, saying that they have influence on the clustering but they cannot be cluster attributes?

Reviewer 2: +1. Would be nice to explicitly list what are the attributes we might support in showing in the UI (I think it's less interesting for end-users that the algorithm might use other stuff behind the scenes)

* ASN domain
* User agent header
* [Threat Intelligence][1]
* [Datadog attacker fingerprinting][2]

When the attacker attributes are identified, we show them on the signal side panel and signal full page.

{{< img src="security/application_security/threats/attacker-attributes.png" alt="Screenshot of an ASM signals with attacker attributes identified"  >}}

## Attacker Clustering Mechanism

The clustering algorithm analyzes frequency of attributes in the traffic of the attack. It selects attributes that appear frequently while also filtering out the noise from your usual traffic. The goal being to suggest an attribute that can be blocked on to stop or slow the attacker down.

The algorithm  tracks the changes in the attack traffic by identifying emerging trends as the attacker changes tactics (ie. change of headers, tool). The attacker cluster gets updated accordingly to the latest traffic trends.

Traffic associated with threat intelligence also weights into the clustering mechanism. The more an attribute is correlated with threat intelligence the higher the chance to create an attacker cluster around this attribute.

> The attacker clustering attributes selected are then shown as regular expressions that can be used to block with ASM's [in-app WAF][3].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The attacker clustering attributes selected are then shown as regular expressions that can be used to block with ASM's [In-App WAF][3].
```
